Feature blog 1.30: user namespaces (#45354)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2024-04-22-userns-beta/index.md

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes 1.30: User Namespaces hits Beta!"
date: 2024-04-22
slug: userns-beta
---

**Authors:** Rodrigo Campos Catelin (Microsoft), Giuseppe Scrivano (Red Hat), Sascha Grunert (Red Hat)

Linux provides different namespaces to isolate processes from each other. For
example, a typical Kubernetes pod runs within a network namespace to isolate the
network identity, a PID namespace to isolate the processes.

One Linux namespace that was left behind is the [user
namespace](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/user_namespaces.7.html). This
namespace allows us to isolate the user and group identifiers (UIDs and GIDs) we
use inside the container from the ones on the host.

This is a powerful abstraction that allows us to run containers as "root": we
are root inside the container and we can do everything root can inside the pod,
but our interactions with the host are limited to what a non-privileged user can
do. This is great to limit the impact of a container breakout.

A container breakout is when a process inside a container is able to break out
onto the host using some unpatched vulnerability in the container runtime or the

> kernel and able to access / modify files on the host or other containers. If we

Author: Fixed, thanks!

run our pods with user namespaces, the privileges the container has over the
rest of the host are reduced and the files outside the container it can access
are limited too.

In Kubernetes v1.25 we introduced support for user namespaces for only stateless
pods. Kubernetes 1.28 lifted that restriction and now, with Kubernetes 1.30, we
are moving to beta!

## What is a user namespace?

> Note: Linux user namespaces are a different concept from [kubernetes
> namespaces](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/namespaces/).

Reviewer: We use site-relative links where feasible.

```suggestion
Note: Linux user namespaces are a different concept from [kubernetes
namespaces](/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/namespaces/).
```

Author: Fixed, thanks!

> The former is a Linux kernel feature, the latter is a kubernetes feature.

Author: Fixed, thanks!

> User namespaces is a Linux feature that isolates the UIDs and GIDs of the

Author: Fixed, thanks

to unprivileged non-overlapping UIDs and GIDs on the host. This brings two key
benefits:

 * _Prevention of lateral movement_: As the UIDs and GIDs for different
containers are mapped to different UIDs and GIDs on the host, containers have a
harder time attacking each other even if they escape the container boundaries.
For example, if container A is running with different UIDs and GIDs on the host
than container B, the operations it can do on container B's files and processes
are limited: only read/write what a file allows to others, as it will never
have permission owner or group permission (the UIDs/GIDs on the host are
guaranteed to be different for different containers).

 * _Increased host isolation_: As the UIDs and GIDs are mapped to unprivileged
users on the host, if a container escapes the container boundaries, even if it
is running as root inside the container, it has no privileges on the host. This
greatly protects what host files it can read/write, which process it can send
signals to, etc. Furthermore, capabilities granted are only valid inside the
user namespace and not on the host, which also limits the impact a container
escape can have.

> ![UIDs/GIDs layout for userns](userns-ids.png)

Reviewer: _Improvement:_ To display the image incorporate a '[figure](https://gohugo.io/content-management/shortcodes/#figure)' shortcode with a caption and maybe also include an alt attribute for better accessibility. Take a look at how the shortcode is utilized in a [previous blog post (here)](https://github.com/kubernetes/website/blob/main/content/en/blog/_posts/2021-09-29-data-duplication-in-data-heavy-k8s-env.md?plain=1#L109).

Author: Improved that, thanks!

Without using a user namespace, a container running as root in the case of a
container breakout, has root privileges on the node. And if some capabilities
were granted to the container, the capabilities are valid on the host too. None

> of this is true when using user namespaces (modulo bugs, of course 🙂).

Reviewer 2: I don't think we can use the emoji -- @sftim can you confirm?

Author: @kcmartin yes, we can. It renders correctly, see it here: https://deploy-preview-45354--kubernetes-io-vnext-staging.netlify.app/blog/2024/04/22/userns-beta/

Also, the emoji was suggested by @sftim IIRC some years ago for another blog post I wrote here.

Reviewer 3: We can use emoji.

## Changes in 1.30

In Kubernetes 1.30, besides moving user namespaces to beta, the contributors
working on this feature:

 * Introduced a way for the kubelet to use custom ranges for the UIDs/GIDs mapping 

>  * Enforce the runtime supports all the features needed for user namespaces,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * Enforced the runtime supports all the features needed for user namespaces,
```

Author: I don't think this is right. The previous item uses "introduced" (past) because adding that feature was done in the past. Here enforce refers to what Kubernetes *does*, in the present.

I rephrased it as:
```
 * Added a way for Kubernetes to enforce the runtime supports all the features
   needed for user namespaces. If they are not supported, Kubernetes will show a
   clear error when trying to create a pod with user namespaces. Before 1.30, if
   the container runtime doesn't support user namespaces, the pod could be created
   without a user namespace.
```

Let me know if you think this is better or if I'm missing something and indeed using "enforced" is correct and simpler.

Reviewer 2: That seems clearer, thank you!

---
layout: blog

> title: "Kubernetes 1.30: User Namespaces hits Beta!"

Reviewer 3: How about:
```suggestion
title: "Kubernetes 1.30: User Namespaces Hit Beta!"
```

(titles in Title Case)

or

```suggestion
title: "Kubernetes 1.30: Beta Support For Pods With User Namespaces"
```

Author: Fixed.

 * _Increased host isolation_: As the UIDs and GIDs are mapped to unprivileged
users on the host, if a container escapes the container boundaries, even if it
is running as root inside the container, it has no privileges on the host. This
greatly protects what host files it can read/write, which process it can send
signals to, etc. Furthermore, capabilities granted are only valid inside the
user namespace and not on the host, which also limits the impact a container
escape can have.

{{< figure src="/images/blog/2024-04-22-userns-beta/userns-ids.png" alt="Image showing IDs 0-65535 are reserved to the host, pods use higher IDs" title="User namespace IDs allocation" >}}

Without using a user namespace, a container running as root in the case of a
container breakout, has root privileges on the node. And if some capabilities
were granted to the container, the capabilities are valid on the host too. None
of this is true when using user namespaces (modulo bugs, of course 🙂).

## Changes in 1.30

In Kubernetes 1.30, besides moving user namespaces to beta, the contributors
working on this feature:

 * Introduced a way for the kubelet to use custom ranges for the UIDs/GIDs mapping 

>  * Added a way for Kubernetes to enforce the runtime supports all the features

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 * Have added a way for Kubernetes to enforce that the runtime supports all the features
```

   needed for user namespaces. If they are not supported, Kubernetes will show a
   clear error when trying to create a pod with user namespaces. Before 1.30, if

>    the container runtime doesn't support user namespaces, the pod could be created

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   the container runtime didn't support user namespaces, the pod could be created
```

   without a user namespace.
 * Added more tests, including [tests in the
   cri-tools](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cri-tools/pull/1354)
   repository.

You can check the
[documentation](/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/user-namespaces/#set-up-a-node-to-support-user-namespaces)

> on user namespaces for how to configure custom ranges to use for the mapping.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
on user namespaces for how to configure custom ranges for the mapping.
```

## Demo

A few months ago, [CVE-2024-21626][runc-cve] was disclosed. This **vulnerability

> score is 8.6 (HIGH)** and allows an attacker to escape a container and

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
score is 8.6 (HIGH)**. It allows an attacker to escape a container and
```

**read/write to any path on the node and other pods hosted on the same node**.

> Rodrigo created a demo which exploits [CVE 2024-21626][runc-cve] and shows how
> the exploit that works without user namespaces, **is mitigated when user

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Rodrigo created a demo that exploits [CVE 2024-21626][runc-cve] and shows how
the exploit, which works without user namespaces, **is mitigated when user
```

namespaces are in use.**

> {{< youtube id="07y5bl5UDdA" title="Mitigation of CVE-2024-21626 on Kubernetes by enabling User Namespace">}}

Reviewer 3: This is a bit large, and title title is slightly off
```suggestion
{{< youtube id="07y5bl5UDdA" title="Mitigation of CVE-2024-21626 on Kubernetes by enabling User Namespace support" class="youtube-quote-sm" >}}
```

What I recommend: leave this as-is until the release day, then once this has merged (even before publication), send in a follow-up PR.

Reviewer 5: > This is a bit large, and title title is slightly off
> 
> What I recommend: leave this as-is until the release day, then once this has merged (even before publication), send in a follow-up PR.

Hi @giuseppe & @saschagrunert, since @rata  is on holidays will you be able to address this suggestion ?

Reviewer 6: Applied the suggestion. :+1:

> Please note that with user namespaces an attacker can do on the host file-system
> what the permission bits for "others" allows. Therefore, the CVE is not
> completely prevented, but the impact is greatly reduced.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Please note that with user namespaces, an attacker can do on the host file system
what the permission bits for "others" allow. Therefore, the CVE is not
completely prevented, but the impact is greatly reduced.
```

[runc-cve]: https://github.com/opencontainers/runc/security/advisories/GHSA-xr7r-f8xq-vfvv

## Node system requirements

> There are requirements on the Linux kernel version as well as the container

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There are requirements on the Linux kernel version and the container
```

runtime to use this feature.

On Linux you need Linux 6.3 or greater. This is because the feature relies on a

> kernel feature named idmap mounts, and support to use idmap mounts with tmpfs

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
kernel feature named idmap mounts, and support for using idmap mounts with tmpfs
```

was merged in Linux 6.3.

> If you are using [CRI-O][crio] with crun, as always you can expect support for

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Suppose you are using [CRI-O][crio] with crun; as always, you can expect support for
```

Kubernetes 1.30 with CRI-O 1.30. Please note you also need [crun][crun] 1.9 or
greater. If you are using CRI-O with [runc][runc], this is still not supported.

> Containerd support is currently targeted for [containerd][containerd] 2.0 and

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Containerd support is currently targeted for [containerd][containerd] 2.0, and
```

the same crun version requirements apply. If you are using containerd with runc,
this is still not supported.

> Please note that containerd 1.7 added _experimental_ support for user
> namespaces as implemented in Kubernetes 1.25 and 1.26. We did a redesign in
> Kubernetes 1.27, which requires changes in the container runtime. Those changes
> are not present in containerd 1.7, so it only works in terms of user namespaces
> support, with Kubernetes 1.25 and 1.26.

Reviewer 4: The phrase "in terms of" feels a little awkward here -- I'm not sure exactly what it means.

Does the following work?

```suggestion
Please note that containerd 1.7 added _experimental_ support for user
namespaces, as implemented in Kubernetes 1.25 and 1.26. We did a redesign in
Kubernetes 1.27, which requires changes in the container runtime. Those changes
are not present in containerd 1.7, so it only works with user namespaces
support in Kubernetes 1.25 and 1.26.
```

Author: That was written by sftim, but I think this works too!

> Another limitation present in containerd 1.7 is that it needs to change the
> ownership of every file and directory inside the container image during Pod
> startup. This means it has a storage overhead and can significantly impact the
> container startup latency. Containerd 2.0 will probably include an implementation
> that will eliminate the startup latency added and the storage overhead. Take
> this into account if you plan to use containerd 1.7 with user namespaces in
> production.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Another limitation of containerd 1.7 is that it needs to change the
ownership of every file and directory inside the container image during Pod
startup. This has a storage overhead and can significantly impact the
container startup latency. Containerd 2.0 will probably include an implementation
that will eliminate the added startup latency and storage overhead. Consider
this if you plan to use containerd 1.7 with user namespaces in
production.
```
